Docs / debugging (#4578)
canonical/cloud-init: doc/rtd/howto/rerun_cloud_init.rst

.. _rerun_cloud_init:

How to rerun ``cloud-init``
***************************

.. _fully_rerun_cloud_init:

How to fully re-run cloud-init
==============================

Most cloud-init configuration is only applied to the system once. This means
that simply rebooting the system will only re-run a subset of cloud-init.
Cloud-init provides two different options for rerunning cloud-init for
debugging purposes.

.. warning::

    Making cloud-init run again may be destructive and must never be done on a production system. Artifacts such as ssh keys or passwords may be overwritten.

Option #1: Remove the logs and cache then reboot

> ************************************************

Author: > Let's add a pair of bullet points on line 19

Bullet points right before the headers looks a bit awkward to me. How does it look now?

This method will reboot the system as if cloud-init never ran. This
command does not remove all cloud-init artifacts from previous runs of
cloud-init, but it will clean enough artifacts to allow cloud-init to
think that it hasn't ran yet and re-run after a reboot.

.. code-block:: shell-session

   cloud-init clean --logs --reboot

Option #2: Run a single cloud-init module
*****************************************

If you are using :ref:`user data cloud-config<user_data_formats-cloud_config>`
format, you might wish to rerun just a single configuration module.
Cloud-init provides the ability to run a single module in isolation and

> separate from boot. This command is:

Author: Fixed

This subcommand is not called by the init system. It can be called manually to
load the configured datasource and run a single cloud-config module once, using
the cached user data and metadata after the instance has booted.

.. code-block:: shell-session

   $ sudo cloud-init single --name cc_ssh --frequency always

Example output:

.. code-block::

   ...
   Generating public/private ed25519 key pair
   ...

.. note::
    Each cloud-config module has a module ``FREQUENCY`` configured: ``PER_INSTANCE``, ``PER_BOOT``, ``PER_ONCE`` or ``PER_ALWAYS``. When a module is run by cloud-init, it stores a semaphore file in :file:`/var/lib/cloud/instance/sem/config_<module_name>.<frequency>` which marks when the module last successfully ran. Presence of this semaphore file prevents a module from running again if it has already been run. To ensure that a module is run again, the desired frequency can be overridden via the command line:

> 

Author: Fixed

Inspect :file:`cloud-init.log` for output of what operations were performed as
a result.

.. _partially_rerun_cloud_init:

How to partially re-run cloud-init
==================================

If the behavior you are testing runs on every boot, there are a couple
of ways to test this behavior.

Option #1: Manually run cloud-init stages
*****************************************

> Note that during normal boot of cloud-init, the init system orders these

Author: thanks, fixed!

stages at specific points during boot. This means that the running code
might not interact with the system in the same way as it does as when it
boots.

.. code-block:: shell-session

   cloud-init init --local
   cloud-init init
   cloud-init modules --mode=config
   cloud-init modules --mode=final

Option #2: Reboot the instance
******************************

> 

Author: Good call, done.

.. _rerun_cloud_init:

How to re-run ``cloud-init``
****************************

.. _fully_rerun_cloud_init:

How to fully re-run cloud-init
==============================

Most cloud-init configuration is only applied to the system once. This means
that simply rebooting the system will only re-run a subset of cloud-init.

> Cloud-init provides two different options for rerunning cloud-init for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cloud-init provides two different options for re-running cloud-init for
```

debugging purposes.

.. warning::

>     Making cloud-init run again may be destructive and must never be done on a production system. Artifacts such as ssh keys or passwords may be overwritten.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Making cloud-init run again may be destructive and must never be done on a production system. Artefacts such as SSH keys or passwords may be overwritten.
```

Example output:

.. code-block::

   ...
   Generating public/private ed25519 key pair
   ...

This subcommand is not called by the init system. It can be called manually to
load the configured datasource and run a single cloud-config module once, using
the cached user data and metadata after the instance has booted.

.. note::

    Each cloud-config module has a module ``FREQUENCY`` configured: ``PER_INSTANCE``, ``PER_BOOT``, ``PER_ONCE`` or ``PER_ALWAYS``. When a module is run by cloud-init, it stores a semaphore file in :file:`/var/lib/cloud/instance/sem/config_<module_name>.<frequency>` which marks when the module last successfully ran. Presence of this semaphore file prevents a module from running again if it has already been run.

Inspect :file:`cloud-init.log` for output of what operations were performed as
a result.

.. _partially_rerun_cloud_init:

How to partially re-run cloud-init
==================================

If the behavior you are testing runs on every boot, there are a couple
of ways to test this behavior.

Manually run cloud-init stages
------------------------------

Note that during normal boot of cloud-init, the init system runs these

> stages at specific points during boot. This means that the running code
> manually after booting the system might will cause the code to interact with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
stages at specific points during boot. This means that running the code
manually after booting the system may cause the code to interact with
```
